mongoDB - to use for database collection but in a non-strict structure unlike SQL. 

MongoDB (Mongo for short) is a non-relational database that stores data in Binary JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), or BSON format. 
We'll access data stored in Mongo the same way we access data stored in JSON files. This method of data storage is far more flexible than SQL's model. 
If you'd like to dig into MongoDB at a deeper level, check out the official documentation (Links to an external site.).


1.)A Mongo database contains collections. These collections contain documents, and each document contains fields, and fields are where the data is stored.

While Mongo and SQL are both databases, that's where the similarities end. 
They handle documents differently, the storage model isn't even close, and we even interact with them in very different ways.

To get started with Mongo, first open a new terminal window, but make sure your working environment is activated. Note that your environment does not need to have the same name as the one in the image.

2.)Then, to start an instance, type mongod into the first line of your terminal and press return or enter on your keyboard. 
Some Mac users may not need to run this command as Mongo is already running in the background

We need to keep this tab open and active so that the Mongo instance continues to run. 
While Mongo does have a GUI, similar to pgAdmin for Postgres, we'll be using a command line interface (CLI) to make connections within the database

3.)In our terminal, create a second window or tab to use for working in Mongo. Again, make sure your environment is active.

On the first line of this new window, type "mongo." This is done in a new window because, after you execute the command, 
you cannot use the terminal for other tasks—only to send information to and from the database.

After executing the command, your terminal will show a right angle bracket and a blinking cursor. This indicates that the database is active and ready for use.

Either process can be easily stopped and exited from by pressing Command + C or CTRL + C on your keyboard.


Terminal DB

We don't have a fancy GUI to use while navigating through creating a database and inserting data, but that doesn't mean that our commands will be very complex. Let's create a new practice database to get used to some of the more common commands.

In the terminal where Mongo is active and awaiting instruction, type "use practicedb" and then press Enter. This creates a new database named "practicedb" and makes it our active database.

After typing "db" into the terminal and pressing Enter, the name of the current active database is returned. This is a quick check to make sure we'll be saving data to the right spot.

You can also see how many databases are stored locally by typing "show dbs" in your terminal. There should be a few already there by default, so don't be alarmed if more than one appears that you didn't create yourself.

There is also a way to check to see what data, or collections, are already in the database. Type "show collections" into the shell, or terminal, then press Enter.

Nothing came up after that, right? That's a good thing. We haven't entered any data yet. We'll practice doing that next.



JSON, JavaScript Object Notation, is a method that sorts and presents data in the form of key:value pairs. 
It looks much like a Python dictionary and can be traversed through using list notation.